.\" Azu CLI manual page
.TH AZU 1 "October 2025" "Azu CLI 0.0.1" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
azu \- Azu Toolkit command line interface
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B azu
[
.I command
]
[
.I options
]
[
.I arguments
]
.SH DESCRIPTION
The Azu CLI is a comprehensive command line tool for the Azu Toolkit ecosystem, providing project scaffolding, development server with hot reload, code generators, database management (via CQL), background jobs, testing and more.
.SH COMMANDS
.SS Project
.TP
.B new
Create a new Azu project.
.TP
.B init
Initialize Azu in an existing project.
.TP
.B version
Show CLI version.
.TP
.B help
Show help and available commands.
.SS Generators
.TP
.B generate, g
Run a generator (model, endpoint, service, scaffold, page, migration, etc.).
.SS Database
.TP
.B db:create
Create database.
.TP
.B db:drop
Drop database.
.TP
.B db:migrate
Run pending migrations.
.TP
.B db:rollback
Rollback migrations.
.TP
.B db:seed
Seed database with data.
.TP
.B db:reset
Drop, create and migrate database.
.TP
.B db:status
Show migration status.
.TP
.B db:setup
Create and migrate database.
.SS Development
.TP
.B serve, server, s
Start development server with hot reload.
.SS Testing
.TP
.B test, t
Run tests (optionally with watch mode).
.SS Jobs (JoobQ)
.TP
.B jobs:worker
Start background job workers.
.TP
.B jobs:status
Show queue status and statistics.
.TP
.B jobs:clear
Clear job queues.
.TP
.B jobs:retry
Retry failed jobs.
.TP
.B jobs:ui
Start JoobQ UI.
.SS Session
.TP
.B session:setup
Setup session management.
.TP
.B session:clear
Clear all sessions.
.SS OpenAPI
.TP
.B openapi:generate
Generate code from OpenAPI specification.
.TP
.B openapi:export
Export endpoints and schemas to OpenAPI.
.SS Plugins
.TP
.B plugin
Plugin management.
.SH OPTIONS
Global options are command dependent. Run:
.PP
.nf
  azu help
  azu <command> --help
.fi
.PP
for detailed options and usage.
.SH EXAMPLES
.nf
  azu new my-app
  azu generate model User name:string email:string
  azu db:create && azu db:migrate
  azu serve
  azu test --watch
.fi
.SH ENVIRONMENT
Configuration is loaded via Azu CLI configuration files and environment; see project documentation.
.SH FILES
Project templates and generators are included with the CLI. See
.I README.md
and
.I CLI_REFERENCE.md
in the repository for details.
.SH SEE ALSO
Project documentation: https://azutopia.gitbook.io/azu/
.br
CQL ORM: https://github.com/azutoolkit/cql
.br
Azu Framework: https://github.com/azutoolkit/azu
.SH AUTHORS
Elias J. Perez and contributors.
.SH REPORTING BUGS
Open issues at https://github.com/azutoolkit/azu_cli/issues

